telegrama cm

ohy, aos, 7
if ate -gd Bt) fe
epee

5 fwBernard WHITMORE

Worcester natives love to tell stories of the city’s glory days. This love
is matched by something approaching despair, as they long to emulate
what they see when they travel to other cities. Compared to Boston, it
seems as if there is nothing interesting going on here at home, nothing

new to explore, no fun,

Over the years, I've learned how to defend my adoptive town, but my
arguments were seldom met with much enthusiasm. ‘Then, recently,
something strange happened: While taking a break at work, a colleague
launched into the age-old lament about Worcester: “Nothing happens
in this dump. There's never any development...”

Astonished, I asked, “Have you driven anywhere in Worcester lately?
Have you seen the changing landscape”

‘Then I listed a few of the new building projects and age-old blighted
areas changing for the better. At social events, there are new faces and
a new sensé of energy. I came to realize that there is a new Worcester
happening, and it’s not taking the form so many past generations

envisioned.

Coincidentally, within days of that conversation, I was
given the opportunity to discuss this phenomenon
with some of our city’s leadership. I leapt at the
opportunity and found their enthusiasm to be genuine
and inspiring.

First, I sat down with Worcester Mayor Joseph M.
Petty.

What do you consider the “New Worcester’?

‘The New Worcester, for me, is a change in perspective.
People that live in our city, and those outside our
city, like what they see happening and are becoming
positive about Worcester. We have momentum which
is attracting top talent, businesses and cultural events.

Nationwide, you are seeing a renewed interest from people who want to
live in cities. This is not just recent college graduates but young families,
seniors who want to downsize and everyone in between. Worcester is a
great place to live and to start a family or business. The operating costs
are not what they are in other cities. Rent is lower, and the cost of real
estate across the board makes it an affordable alternative. The quality of
life is excellent, as is the cost of real estate and rentals.

Our relationship as a city with the colleges and universities is better
than ever. Their graduates are certainly taking a longer look at Worcester
and trying to find a way to make it work here, We are activating the
City Hall Common with events that people want to go to; this has
helped pull people out of those office buildings and is driving positive
activity downtown,

It is about creating the 18-hour city that we are trying to build. Cities as
a whole are more attractive to both businesses and residents. Businesses
want to be where the action is, and I am certain that is part of the

 

Worcester Mayor

Joseph M.

reason the PawSox are interested in Worcester. I am sure there’s some
appeal to working in a suburban office park, but the next generation of
workers just do not see it that way.

For cities, especially now, that question of identity is incredibly fluid.
It is based on history; it is based on the generations of immigrants
that came and left and those who stayed. It is based on restaurants and
employment. And all of those things change over time. When I grew
up in Worcester, I never would have guessed that one day Ghanaian
would be widely spoken in our schools.

I think what we are seeing is the growth of community as much as
identity. You are seeing the people that are driving the arts community
with events like POW! WOW! working shoulder to shoulder with
the young people managing the makerspace Technocopia. When I was
younger, you would never have seen a muralist and a welder speak the
same language; today, that’s fairly common.

It is that’sort of collaboration and.cross-pollination that can create
some amazing results. Success breeds success. Five years ago, the idea
of daily flights to New York City would have been too much to even
dream about. This is coming about after years of work
on the part of Congressman McGovern and a city
team going back to Tim Murray when he was mayor.

‘The city has advocated for greater investment in our
airport by the state. That has led to over a 10-year,
$85 million investment plan by the state. As these
investments are made, it makes it easier for Jet Blue
to come in and offer something like daily flights to
JFK Airport.

Our business and non-profit communities are
absolutely part of moving our city forward. These
are the organizations that are funding programs like
Recreation Worcester. This is a free, after-school and
ety summer camp program offered to all the children in
Worcester. Programs like this keep our students safe,
active and healthy and are only possible because of the partnerships
with so many organizations and companies. And that sort of program
is one small piece of the puzzle, but it is certainly an important one. '

What's the nature of the partnership between the mayer and
city manager in moving the city forward?

We work closely on many initiatives. While infighting and partisanship
might make for good television, it is no way to govern a city. Conflict
is for politics. Consensus is for governing, I personally do not want to
see the sort of acrimony on exhibit in Washington become normal on

a local level.
If you could change one thing in Worcester, what would it be?

First, I would like the PawSox to move here. Second, I wish there was
a really dynamite bagel shop here. I mean a bagel shop so good that
as people drove past on the Mass Pike, they would say, “You know,
Worcester has this amazing bagel shop. We should stop.”at ea celal NedAfter this conversation with Mr. Petty, I sat down with Worcester
City Manager Edward M. Augustus Jr., and posed similar questions.

Is there a “New Worcester’?

People have used the term “renaissance,” and that’s probably a good
way to characterize what’s going on in Worcester. Worcester’s been
reinventing itself from an old, heavy manufacturing economic base
that, over the last 25 years or so, has been morphing into more a service
economy ~ “eds and meds,” a knowledge-based economy.

It’s been a painful process. We lost a lot of the old manufacturing
companies, It’s created a lot of dislocation, lots of angst and change.
But I think we're hitting our stride right now. Quite frankly, I think
Worcester has positioned itself to embrace the future partly because of
our heavy college presence in the city - the growing biotechnology and
life sciences sector.

‘The other thing about change is it’s more than “bricks and mortar” it’s
an attitude. By that, I mean people's feelings of, “Oh, it can't happen
here. ... It won't work here.”

I think we're shedding that self-loathing. We're starting to say, “Why
not us? Why not Worcester?” I think that once you start making that
shift in thinking, actions and results start translating:

* ‘The city is getting younger. If you look at the
numbers, we're retaining a lot more of the
college grads than we had previously; some of
the younger people that might have gone away
to school are coming back to the city.

* We're finally embracing our identity as a college
town. For a long time, we had a love-hate
relationship with the colleges. Our situation is a
little unique in that the geographic location of
the college campuses allowed them to be islands.
In Worcester, if you came to the downtown, you
wouldn't have seen them — until the past five or
10 years with the Mass College of Pharmacy,
Quinsigamond College and Becker. Now, you're
seeing it in the downtown more than before.

*  Three-and-a-half years ago, before I became
manager, we didn’t have food trucks in Worcester.
We had ordinances that basically banned them
because they'd compete with restaurants. Then
we said, “Let’s revisit that; we can have both.” Since then, we've
had an explosion of restaurants and food trucks.

* We've had two back-to-back, very successful POW! WOW!
mural festivals. We're now integrating public art into some of our
capital projects. I think the mayor has been a big leader in terms
of embracing diversity within the community, particularly the
immigrant community.

* Another example is what we've just done with the bikes - the
bicycle-share program. You see the new yellow bikes all over the

city.
Taken together, all of those things tend to create an atmosphere, a
culture in the city that attracts people. There are food trucks, places
to hang out, events to go to, public art that’s engaging! It’s the big

projects, but it is also the little things that have added up to create a
culture that makes Worcester feel different than it was.

Downtown has been a block-by-block, building-by-building battle
that’s all about density, We're trying to create density, When you
achieve density, the market reacts; people say, “There’s 2,000-3,000
people living downtown that weren't living there before; they’re paying
$2,000-plus a month for rent. These people have money! I want to put
a restaurant here or a coffee shop over there or retail.”

 

Worcester City Manager
Edward M. Augustus Jr.

We're trying to embrace market forces instead of working against them.

As part of that, we've challenged ourselves as a city to fan these
embers of growth by trying to do infrastructure changes in a way that
encourages walkability, a more interesting and engaging streetscape, to
get rid of these blocks of dead buildings where there’s blank facades
and covered up windows.

That's not only aesthetic, it’s also about safety. If you're walking down
a street and you see people eating in a restaurant or you see people in
an outside café, it gives you a sense of safety and security. You're not
there by yourself. It’s part of a thoughtful strategy that’s worked in
other cities.

[Regarding identity] I think what we're trying to be is authentic and
not put labels such as “Paris of the ’80s” or “Austin of the ’90s” on
ourselves any more.

A lot of the development, like the Canal District, is organic. It didn’t
come handed down from City Hall. It’s rea/, it embraces some of the
old mill history of Worcester and has reclaimed those buildings and
turned them into funky spaces for living, shopping and entertainment.

I think we've learned the lesson of nor forcing something.
What matters is what works. Everything else is ephemeral.
Tell me about your relationship with the mayor.

My friendship with Joe Petty goes back 35 years or
so. We grew up in essentially the same neighborhood
~ the Webster Square area. Not many people know
this: There was a softball team at Our Lady of the
Angels; he was the coach and I was the star player
[considerable laughter followed by light-hearted
regrets at the boast].

We've stayed friendly and known each other over the
years, shared a lot of common friends and then, for
the last 3% years, you couldn't ask for a better partner
than Joe, working with me as the mayor and chair of
the city council, trying to move the agenda forward.

We don’t worry about who's getting the credit; we
figure if you do the right thing, there’s plenty of credit
for everybody. It’s about always working together,
checking in with each other, making sure we're working in concert

with each other. 4

In past Worcester history, that wasn't always the case. A lot of energy
can be lost when you're trying to outdo each other. We have total trust.
I have never thought twice about whether Joe Petty was on my side,
and hopefully he feels the same.

If you could change one thing in Worcester, what would it be?

The attitude,

By that I mean the attitude of, “Oh, it won't work here!” The negative,
self-fulfilling prophesy of “we can’t do it.” think it is changing, but I'd
like it to change quicker and to be more universal.

Let’s suspend disbelief! Just for once! Just for a little bit and see what
it feels like! And see what can come when you don't immediately
approach an issue or a project by figuring out every little thing that
could go wrong with it.

If you think about it, your whole approach changes; your energy
changes when you approach challenges in a positive way!

ee

 

Sn a peer